---
author: knowingnaturepodcast
comments: true
date: 2020-08-29 09:08:48+00:00
draft: false
slug: murder-hornets-and-science-news-literacy
title: '"Murder hornets" and science news literacy'
episode: 29
image: hornet.jpg
music: Selfish
categories:
- Podcast
- Journal Club
---

{{<podbean id="">}}

Using science news literacy skills to put click-bait in context. Discussion
about recent stories of ‘murder hornets’ found in monitoring traps in the
United States. Tips to avoid being distracted by emotionally charged language.

## Articles discussed

**Article 1** \- [‘Murder hornets’ trapped in US for first time as officials race to eradicate colonies before breeding season](https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/giant-asian-murder-hornets-invasive-species-washington-state-kill-humans-a9650216.html). First printed 2 August, 2020

**Article 2** \- ['Murder hornets' have arrived in the U.S.—here's what you should know](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/animals/2020/05/asian-giant-hornets-arrive-united-states/). First printed 4 May, 2020

**Article 3** \- ['Murder hornet' mania highlights dangers of fearing insects and spiders](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/animals/2020/08/unfounded-fear-of-insects-murder-hornets-bees/). First printed 3 August, 2020

## Science News Literacy Skills

  1. **Identifying loaded language**

Is the language used emotionally charged? How does the language used make you
feel about the subject?

  2. **Evaluating justifications and accuracy**

Is there good reason for using emotionally charged language? Is there enough
evidence for conclusions drawn? How strong is the evidence cited in the
article?

  3. **Assessing content context**

Does the article give you enough information to come to solid conclusions? Are
risks put in terms you can understand? How many sources does the article draw
from?

  4. **Assessing media context**

What do other new sources have to say about the story? Are they all drawing
from the same source? Have journalists gotten the views of other experts in
the field?

## Article 1

### Loaded language

Headline - _‘Murder hornets’ trapped in US for first time as officials race to
eradicate colonies before breeding season_

  * Uses very emotionally charged language which give a sense of fear and urgency

_“slaughter phase”_  

  * Sounds scary, and makes the behaviour seem excessive and senseless as in the phrase ‘senseless slaughter’

### Accuracy

_“murder hornets” due to their lethal sting to humans_

  * Suggests that being stung is lethal. ‘Potentially’ or ‘in rare cases’ would more accurately reflect the data on bee stings 

  * No justification given for use of loaded terms like ‘murder’

### Content context

  * No context given to risk from stings
  * Scientists’ concern about impact on wilds species is omitted

  * Bee/wasp/hornet sting deaths
    * US ~60/year or >0.2/million ([CDC](https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/mm6829a5.htm#:~:text=During%202000%E2%80%932017%2C%20a%20total,Source%3A%20National%20Vital%20Statistics%20System.)) 
    * UK ~2-9/year or >0.08/million ([National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence](https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta246/documents/venom-anaphylaxis-immunotherapy-pharmalgen-final-scope2#:~:text=Every%20year%20in%20the%20UK,to%20anaphylaxis%20as%20bee%20stings.)) 

  * Lightning strikes - 27 deaths per year in US - [National Weather service](https://www.weather.gov/safety/lightning-odds#:~:text=According%20to%20the%20NWS%20Storm,with%20various%20degrees%20of%20disability.)

### Media context

  * Seems to be responding to a press release
  * Many other sources with very similar headlines
  * Most sources cite [Washington State Department of Agriculture press release](https://agr.wa.gov/about-wsda/news-and-media-relations/news-releases?article=31413)

## Article 2

### Loaded language / Justification / Accuracy

Asian giant hornet - Most frequently used common name. Accurate description.
The hornet’s population is focused in Asia and it is quite large.

Invasive - Has meaning for the scientific community, describing a species
which has been introduced to an area and has a harmful impact. Also elicits
emotional reaction from association with invading armies.

‘Slaughter phase’ is used but is given more context. The hornets kill their
prey then move to a feeding phase where they consume it.

### Content context

Gives more context to why people should care about the story. Danger to people
and to bees.

Gives more context to danger to humans. Giving numbers for people who die from
stings. However it does not give comparisons to more common risks (eg. traffic
accidents), or events which pose comparable risk (eg. lightning strike).

Bee killing behaviour is given context in the hornet’s ecology, but no
comparison is given to other hornets or wasps.

Global context is given. Describing why these hornets are a concern in North
America. North American bees have not coevolved with the hornets and do not
have defensive behaviours against them.

### Media context

Precedes Independent article. Perhaps responding to press release about
sightings of the hornet, which are later confirmed by specimens caught in
traps.

## Article 3

### Loaded language

“Murder hornet” is present in the headline. However it is followed by ‘mania’,
which has the effect of moderating the impact of using ‘murder’ by suggesting
that the fear generated by the term is not rational.

‘Mania’ implies widespread and irrational behaviour.

### Justification / Accuracy

A section of the article describes the context which justifies their use of
the term ‘mania’.

### Content context

Article focuses on public reactions to the earlier hornet story, putting it in
the context of other alarming looking wasps. In this case _Megachile pluto_ or
Wallace’s giant bee, which has very large mandibles. Reporting on this bee
species has elicited very negative reactions in the public despite it being
harmless.

Hornets and risk are placed in context of other insect/invertebrate bites and
stings, describing very low risk.

Anticipates the potential for the reader to be concerned about the danger of
the hornets and places the reader’s reaction in the context of attitudes
toward insects and spiders more generally. This has the effect of moderating
the potential concern by encouraging the reader to pay attention to data on
risk and consider the positive relationships other cultures have to
invertebrates.

Numerous sources and researchers feature in the article with links to their
research and websites.

### Media context

Responds to prior reporting of the murder hornet story and the public response
which was elicited.

Most, if not all of the content in this article could have been included in
the earlier story to mitigate the negative impact. However it seems likely
that pressure to publish a story early probably precluded getting the
perspectives of the sources used in this later article.

## More on hornets

[Are 'murder hornets' really as scary as they sound? - Natural History Museum](https://www.nhm.ac.uk/discover/are-murder-hornets-really-as-scary-as-they-sound.html)

[What you need to know about ‘murder hornets’ - Science News for Students](https://www.sciencenewsforstudents.org/article/what-you-need-to-know-about-murder-hornets)

Questions? Comments? [Get in touch](/about).
