---
author: knowingnaturepodcast
comments: true
date: 2020-11-29 08:45:00+00:00
draft: false
slug: decolonizing-environmental-education
title: Decolonizing environmental education
episode: 37
image: decolonizing.jpg
music: Marble_Machine
categories:
- Podcast
tags:
- Decolonizing
- Pedagogy
podbean:
  id: emdq9-f38903
  mp3: https://mcdn.podbean.com/mf/web/piwfup/Ep_37_-_Decolonizing_environmental_education73tp5.mp3
summary: Thoughts on the colonial legacies in environmental education in the UK. Thoughts on how to start decolonizing your own teaching and being more culturally responsive.
---

{{<podcast-player>}}

## How does environmental education reproduce colonial structures and mindsets?

Environmental education is often done from a western scientific perspective. Concepts of natural capital and ecosystem services take the relationship between the natural world and people and encodes it within a capitalist system of values. In theory, these concepts could push economic and political systems to safeguard nature because of its value as raw resources and ‘free’ services such as flood protection or purification of air and water.

Indigenous ways of conceptualizing nature often do not have the strong dichotomy between people and nature. Places are part of the people who live there, and are often referred to as relations. Evaluating the worth of an area’s resources and services might be like trying to quantify the value of your cousins or your parents.

In an article by Sheelah McLean in The Canadian Geographer, she writes that
environmental education tends to focus on the effects of environmental
destruction in a way which ignores root causes like capitalism and
colonialism, and overlooks the different ways environmental damage can impact
different populations.

It seems to me that there has been significant change in the last few years
with progress seemingly being made by indigenous populations and countries of
the global south beginning to have their voices represented and respected in
national and global forums. Though there is still a long way to go
environmental educators do seem to be recognizing concepts of environmental
justice.

  * Aikenhead, G.S., Ogawa, M. (2007). _Indigenous knowledge and science revisited. Cultural Studies of Science Education. 2, 539–620._ <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11422-007-9067-8)>

  * McLean, S. (2013), _The whiteness of green: Racialization and environmental education._ The Canadian Geographer / Le Géographe canadien, 57: 354-362. <https://doi.org/10.1111/cag.12025>

## Colonization in the British Isles

There is a bit of a sense that decolonizing efforts are not relevant in the UK
because it does not have an indigenous population. Related to this, there can
be a sense that efforts at decolonization forgets white kids. That cultural
responsiveness leaves them behind because they don’t have a culture.

Looking back through history, the peoples of Ireland and the British Isles
have actually been subject to a series of colonization events which affected
the languages and views of the people here.

  * Celtic tribes had different languages and material cultures. Sometimes they got along, and sometimes they didn’t. They invaded one another, took over, and ruled over peoples from other tribes.
  * Then there was Roman conquest. Which shaped the cultures and even the british landscape. They shaped the british diet with the introduction of such exotic plants as apples and plums.
  * Viking invasions and imposition of Danelaw. Which shaped much of the english language, including famously the names for the days of the week.
  * Norman invasion from France. 

Learning about how these episodes left marks on what are now the cultures of
the British Isles, might go some way towards understanding that white
identities are cultural.

Britain is also a colonizing power. When we talk about the legacy of
colonialism elsewhere in the world, one of the main issues discussed is the
way colonizing powers create narratives and structures to legitimize and
reinforce control. Often they are based on narratives and systems used at home
to legitimize and reinforce structures of inequality.

The pedagogies developed by efforts to decolonize education around the world
generally include these themes:

  * First, an acknowledgement of the history of colonized peoples, that they existed and thrived before colonization and have suffered since
  * Listening to and valuing the experiences of peoples who had been silenced. 

These themes are in large part about understanding and reconciling with
differences and inequalities, and so they are themes which offer benefits even
for places or peoples without the same recent history colonization.  

## What might decolonizing environmental education look like?

Recognition that our perspectives on nature are shaped by our personal
cultural background, and the cultural environments we work within. And that
part of our role as educators is to build bridges between these different ways
of knowing.

  * Conducting an archaeology of your own way of understanding the world. 
    * What is your relationship with nature? 
    * What experiences shaped your views?
    * Who guided and taught you? How did they teach you?
    * What was your relationship to structures of power and authority? 

  * Invite students or community members to share their own knowledge and understanding. 
    * It can be an opportunity for elders to share their knowledge with a younger generation. And for children who have drifted away from the culture of their parents and grandparents, another opportunity to reconnect.
    * Don't expect them to be the expert. Many indigenous peoples have lost or weakened connections with their culture because of histories of oppression by colonial powers. Also we are the teacher, and should not expect a student to do all the heavy lifting.

  * Find out how students learned before they started school and while they’re at home. 
    * What are the strategies their parents or families use to teach life skills?

## Tips for culturally responsive teaching

  * _[Culturally responsive teaching strategies - Cult of Pedagogy](https://www.cultofpedagogy.com/culturally-responsive-teaching-strategies/)_
  *  _[Decolonizing the Classroom: Step 1 - National Council of Teachers of English](https://ncte.org/blog/2019/04/decolonizing-the-classroom/)_
  * [rethinkingschools.org](https://rethinkingschools.org/)

### Gamify it

Gamification adds game elements into teaching. Zaretta highlights that games
often make use of features common in oral knowledge traditions like repetition
and pattern recognition. It also adds a bit of competition.

Competition does not have to be against other students. It can also be
competition against themselves, like in speed run games where you try to beat
your previous score or a set time limit. Gamification can also include
competition against the game, which can support development of collaboration
skills. Think board games like Forbidden Desert, or team games like keep up
where the group works together to keep the ball in the air as long as
possible.

What might culturally responsive gamification look like? Find out what games
or kinds of games the kids you work with like to play and build activities
around those. Do the kids like to play chasing games? Make-believe games?
Games of chance?

What are kids doing their games? And do those game elements echo systems of
concepts you are teaching about?

Better still. Have students develop their own game. After being introduced to
the concept, students could adapt the rules a game to fit the concept being
taught. This is also a great opportunity to check student’s understanding of
the relationships between different parts of a concept.  

  * _Predator and prey variations_
    *  _[Simple](https://dragon.sleepdeprived.ca/games/wide_games/wide_games_15.htm)_
    *  _[Complex](http://archive-srel.uga.edu/outreach/kidsdoscience/kidsdoscience-predator-game.htm)_

### Make it Social

Making it social is about organizing learning activities so that students rely
on each other and build a sense of community. Euro-American education tends to
be very individualistic. Students are often trained to care about their own
performance, keep their eyes on their own work. But many other cultures have a
more communal orientation, and students with this sort of background can find
individualistic settings difficult to adjust to.

Well organized and supported group work is a great way of doing this. But
group work is not as simple as splitting a class into groups. The task needs
to be clear and suitable for division of labour. Group size needs to be
appropriate for the time, task, and class dynamics. Larger groups tend to need
longer to work because it takes more time for everyone to take part and get
organized.

  * _[The benefits of a communal orientation - Psychology Today](https://www.psychologytoday.com/gb/blog/love-the-numbers/201304/the-benefits-communal-orientation)_
  *  _[Promoting group work, collaborative and cooperative learning in the primary school Tip sheet for teachers - Primary Professional Development service](https://www.psychologytoday.com/gb/blog/love-the-numbers/201304/the-benefits-communal-orientation)_
  *  _[How can we encourage effective collaboration in the classroom? - Schools Week](https://schoolsweek.co.uk/how-can-we-encourage-effective-collaboration-in-the-classroom/)_

### Storify it

This is about taking advantage of narrative structure and our familiarity with
it to enhance our ability to remember the content. It is often easier to
remember the events in a narrative than a list of facts because the events
provide context for the next event. Sort of a chain of events where recalling
one link helps with recalling events around it.

Narrative is key in many cultures with strong traditions of passing on
knowledge orally. There is also a growing body of research suggesting that
narrative understandings are actually the default way in which humans
understand the world.

Then there are simple things like good narratives building moments of tension
and excitement, sweeping the audience up and carrying them with it. Engel,
Lucido, and Cook in an article in Childhood Education point out that science
narratives also contain information about the storyteller or scientists as
people. This can make them more approachable and relatable, instead of being
remarkable, exceptional, or unlike normal people. The way protagonists faced
and overcame challenges can also help children see ways they might overcome
the challenges in their own lives.

  * _[Alison Engel, Kathryn Lucido& Kyla Cook (2018) Rethinking Narrative: Leveraging storytelling for science learning, Childhood Education, 94:6, 4-12](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00094056.2018.1540189), DOI: _[_10.1080/00094056.2018.1540189_](https://doi.org/10.1080/00094056.2018.1540189)
  *  _Henry, E. (2014). A Search for Decolonizing Place-Based Pedagogies: An Exploration of Unheard Histories in Kitsilano Vancouver, B.C. Canadian Journal of Environmental Education. 19, p18-30._

## **Pitfalls to avoid**

### Tokenism

Where bits and pieces of cultures are scattered through an activity. Which can
have the effect of reinforcing stereotypes, over emphasizing differences, and
othering already marginalized communities.

Things which can help with this are making sure that when teaching about
cultures, make the people central to the lesson. So if teaching about
rainforests or deforestation, don’t just drop in mention of Amazonian peoples.
Instead choose one or more groups to highlight and make their perspective, and
their voices central to the lesson or the unit.

### Giving no context

Lack of context can reinforce inaccurate or sometimes harmful stereotypes. A
very simple example of this is depiction of peoples in traditional clothing.
Often the clothing depicted is worn only on special occasions. It would be
like a story about American Christians only showing people in wedding dresses
and tuxedos. A good way to avoid this is to make sure that you are also
teaching about everyday life, homes, and pastimes, in addition to special
occasions, sacred places, and ritual practices. Another good approach, if a
group is represented in the school or local community, is to ask them what
they’d like to share.

### Infantilization / Romanticization

When looking at how peoples and their ways of knowing are represented, and
look out for infantilizing or romanticizing them.

Infantilizing most literally refers to treating someone like a child. Think of
sayings like ‘kids will be kids’, and ‘they didn’t know better’. A way
environmental education can accidentally veer into this area is presenting
traditional methods as ‘the old ways of doing things before new and better
ways (probably from Europeans or westerners) came along’. Or these people
thought this, but scientists now know better. This has the effect of devaluing
traditional methods or knowledge, potentially offending or alienating groups.  

Romatizication is in some ways the inverse, and also problematic. Think the
‘noble savage’ trope. In environmental education this also tends to
characterize traditional cultures and indigenous people as being in harmony
with nature, in the sense of living in it without damaging or impacting its
functioning.

This paints people’s with a broad brush, making them 1-dimensional
caricatures. It can also produce an image of empty landscapes, untouched by
people. This is first, more than likely incorrect as there is considerable
evidence that traditional cultures and indigenous peoples had significant
impact on their environments. It can reinforce views of indigenous people as
being primitive, lesser, lacking advanced technology. In addition, if
landscapes are thought of as untouched, it becomes easier to justify taking
over land for development or resource extraction.

A strategy for avoiding these pitfalls is to do more detailed comparison. Look
for insights provided by different ways of conceptualizing nature. What kinds
of knowledge are generated by spending a month living in a forest, visiting a
forest once a month for 5 years, or using satellite images?

Look for the pros and cons of different methods. For example, when and why
might you choose to bake bread by hand? Why might someone not be able to make
bread in a breadmaker? Why might someone choose to go to the store and buy a
loaf?

Investigate practices and the ways in which they maintained or changed the
environment. How widespread was or is a particular system of agriculture? How
did it support the local environment? How did it change the local environment?

  * _[What Traditional Societies Can Teach You About Life - Smithsonian Magazine](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/people-places/what-traditional-societies-can-teach-you-about-life-172240516/)_
  *  _Hames, Raymond, The Ecologically Noble Savage Debate. Annual Review of Anthropology, Vol. 36, October 2007, Available at SSRN:_[ _https://ssrn.com/abstract=1051861_](https://ssrn.com/abstract=1051861)

### More on Culturally responsive teaching

  * _[Culturally Responsive Teaching: What You Need to Know - Understood.org](https://www.understood.org/en/school-learning/for-educators/universal-design-for-learning/what-is-culturally-responsive-teaching)_
  *  _[Critical indigenous literacies: Selecting and using Children’s Books about indigenous Peoples - Debbie Reese - National Council of Teachers of English](https://library.ncte.org/journals/LA/issues/v95-6/29686)_
  *  _[Culturally sustaining Pedagogy: an introduction - Centre for Professional Education of Teachers - Columbia University](https://cpet.tc.columbia.edu/news-press/culturally-sustaining-pedagogy-an-introduction)_
  *  _[Culturally responsive instruction resource list - colorincolorado.org](https://www.colorincolorado.org/culturally-responsive-resources)_

### Questions? Comments? Feedback?

Send them to knowingnaturepodcast@gmail.com

Twitter: @KN_Podcast

