---
author: knowingnaturepodcast
comments: true
date: 2020-07-02 13:42:31+00:00
draft: false
slug: video-games-and-enviro-ed
title: Video games and enviro-ed
episode: 19
image: videogames.jpg
music: Selfish
categories:
- Podcast
podbean:
  id: p2sgh-e1e02e
  mp3: https://knowingnature.podbean.com/mf/play/8i5c87/Ep19-_Video_games_and_enviro-ed_9mjnq.mp3
summary: Discussion on how video games can be used as a tool for learning about the natural world. Ideas for teachers. Games discussed Minecraft, Oxygen not Included, and Animal Crossing.
---

{{<podcast-player>}}

## How games can support engagement with nature

  * Can allow introduction to new places and creatures in a ‘safe’ environment. This can help build a sense of familiarity and reduce worry about wild spaces and animals.
  * Can allow increased ‘access’ to remote or dangerous places, and allow encounters with rare animals.

## Potential pitfalls

  * Oversimplification leading to misconceptions.
  * Safe virtual interaction leading to false sense of security.
  * False impression of how common some animals are.
  * Instant gratification leading to unrealistic expectations of the natural world.

## Game recommendations

**Minecraft** \- Very popular so many kids may have played it before. Reducing
the need to teach the class how to use the tool. Even if students haven’t used
it before it is very intuitive. Lots of nature-based elements are already part
of the game (biomes, animals, materials, geology). While in ‘creative mode’ it
can be used as 3D modelling software which allows you to go into your
creations. There is now functionality for exporting builds to view in the real
world using augmented reality..

**Oxygen not included** \- Space survival and colony building game. Great for
understanding interacting systems. You need to build systems to keep your
colonists alive. For instance you can electrolyze water to create oxygen, use
the resulting hydrogen to create energy, while managing heat generated by
machinery.

The game also implements many properties of elements and materials. Properties
of gasses like density and specific heat capacity are implemented in the game.
These can be taken advantage of in-game to build more efficient life support
systems. Understanding these mechanics can allow kids to get a sense for how
those properties work in real life.

**Animal Crossing** \- Sandbox building and collecting game. In-game museum
allows you to display insect and fish specimens you collect. The curator also
gives you some information about your specimens. Wide variety of animals and
fossils in the game can be another way for kids to become more familiar with
the natural world, and change the way they interact with specimens in museums.

Taking advantage of games as a parent

**Take interest** \- Conversations about the game. Kids love to show you what
they know/have learned about the game. Allows you to steer conversations to
comparisons with the real world.

**Learn to play the game** \- Take advantage of fact that most modern games
have some multiplayer aspect to play with them. Gives you more common ground
to talk about and a better feel for the possibilities for steering
conversations. Also allows you to get a better understanding of the
potentially addictive qualities of the game and see microtransaction elements.

## Strategies for limiting game time

Coordinate allowed gaming times with other parents. Gets around the struggle
with kids feeling like they are missing out of what their friends are doing

Playing with kids allows you to say ‘we should take a break’ instead of ‘you
should take a break’.

## Ideas for using videogames in teaching

Important to be clear in what you want to achieve and carefully consider if a
game is a good tool for the job. Is your focus in a lesson going to be
concepts, teamwork, or communication skills etc?

**Introducing concepts  **

  * Runs the risk of teaching misconceptions. However facilitating discussions about differences between the game and reality can be a valuable exercise in analysis and evaluation.

**Demonstrating learning**  

  * Students can explain how they got around the limitations of the game to get close to what they want to show
  * Some games can be treated like another medium for expression of ideas alongside essays, posters, dioramas, videos etc. 
  * Some games can be used like 3D modelling or animation software. Create videos/documentaries in games.

**Keeping track of learning**

  * Use developer patch notes as a model for keeping track of learning and ideas. Real world example of professionals acknowledging mistakes and correcting them.

Do you have a game recommendation? [Send us your thoughts](/about)!

