---
author: knowingnaturepodcast
comments: true
date: 2021-03-01 07:35:00+00:00
draft: false
slug: peppered-moths-example-of-evolution-and-science-at-work
title: 'Peppered moths: Example of evolution and science at work'
episode: 43b
wordpress_id: 446
categories:
- Podcast
tags:
- Resources
---

{{<audio src="https://mcdn.podbean.com/mf/web/h6yaja/Ep_43_-_EE_research_news_and_Peppered_mothsa8vg9.mp3" >}}

Part 2: Primer on a resource on the peppered moth and evolution, using
digitized specimens from the collections of the Natural History Museum.

The story of the peppered moth is a great illustration of evolution by natural
selection. And the study of the phenomenon now called industrial melanism is
also a great example of how science operates.

[Peppered moth PowerPoint](https://knowingnaturepodcast.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/peppered-moths.pptx) \- free to download!

## Evolution

The peppered moth (Biston betularia) is a species with huge variation. They
can be white and speckled (which is the _typica_ colour form _)_ to almost
entirely black __ (the _carbonaria_ form _)._ In the 19th century, collectors
in Britain noticed that the darker form was becoming more common.  

At this time coal had been fuelling the industrial revolution. This put out
huge amounts of air pollution, including lots of sulphur compounds. When these
mixed with water vapour in the atmosphere it formed sulfuric acid, which fell
as acid rain. This is not great for plants, particularly lichen, some species
are very sensitive to this. The death of these light-coloured lichens and soot
from the coal, led to darker tree trunks and branches in forests around big
industrial cities such as Birmingham and Manchester.

Naturalists guessed that darker _carbonaria_ moths were better camouflaged
against the darkened trees, and less likely to be eaten by birds. Burning coal
was changing the environment and putting selective pressure on peppered moths
making it more likely for darker forms to survive. The carbonaria form became
uncommon in peppered moth populations, and the phenomenon became known as
industrial melanism. Since the Clean Air Act came into force in the UK in
1956, lichens have regrown and the lighter coloured moths have become more
common again. And the peppered moth has become a textbook example of evolution
by natural selection.

## Science at work

The story of naturalists investigating this phenomenon is also a good window
into how science operates. In the 1950’s scientists experimented by putting
moths on trees and seeing if colour and contrast with tree trunks had an
effect on a bird’s likelihood of finding and eating the moth. Part of the old
maxim is to never work with animals, I imagine because you can’t tell them
what to do. So often these scientists worked with dead moths, pinning or
gluing them to tree trunks, and finding that moths camouflage against the
trees was at work.

However these methods came under heavy criticism, and for a while peppered
moths were knocked off their textbook pedestal. The main criticisms centered
around scientists creating experimental situations which did not accurately
reflect the real world. Dead moths can’t sense birds and fly away. And
scientists had been pinning them to tree trunks (probably because it was
convenient), when it was argued that peppered moths tended to hide on tree
branches.

Scientists responded to this criticism by designing experiments differently.
The most comprehensive was conducted by Michael Majerus. Majerus examined
trees and noted the resting positions of wild moths. Then using this
information he released thousands of live moths over several years at
densities reflecting a wild population. He kept them in ‘sleeves’ around
resting locations until they settled at sunrise. Then he removed the sleeves
and would return 4 hours later. The moths rarely flew away, so missing moths
were presumed eaten. He also observed some of the moths through binoculars and
recorded what they were eaten by, and found it was indeed birds doing the
eating.

[Read more about Majerus' research ](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsbl.2011.1136)\- Royal Society: Biology Letters

## Activity ideas

### Tracking industrial melanism

Discuss images of moth samples collected across several decades. Is the mix of
colour forms the same in each one? Why might the increase and then decrease in
burning coal have an impact on the colour of the moth population? Could you
conduct and experiment to collect evidence to support your hypothesis?

### Model moths

Make model moths with clay or dough and paint them light or dark patterns.
Bring your moths outside and see what natural surfaces your moths can
camouflage on. What would happen to your moth if the environment changed due
to deforestation? What if one type of tree or plant in your environment died
out and other became more common? What if there were no natural surfaces, only
human made ones?

### Moths in unnatural habitats

Think about the habitat of your classroom or home. Research UK moths. Which UK
moths might be camouflaged in your classroom or home? Is camouflage enough for
a moth to survive and reproduce? You could also draw and colour in your own
new moth species which would be suited to your surroundings.

### Gather your own evidence

Design an experiment to test the story of the peppered moth. How could you
collect evidence that the colour of a moth and the colour of tree bark affects
chances of surviving and reproducing?

