---
author: knowingnaturepodcast
comments: true
date: 2020-06-27 10:02:00+00:00
draft: false
slug: nausicaa
title: _Nausicaa_
episode: 18
image: nausicaa.jpg
music: Selfish
categories:
- Podcast
- Film Club
tags:
- People and nature
podbean:
  id: i8pb2-e12fe7
summary: Discussion of the 1984 film Nausicaa of the Valley of the Wind. We discuss what the film says about how people relate to the natural world, and how unfamiliarity breeds fear.
---

{{<film director="Hayao Miyazaki"
        starring="Sumi Shimamoto(voice), Mahito Tsujimura(voice), Hisako Kyôda(voice)"
        thumb="nausicaa_cover.jpg"
        release-date="1984-03-11"
        runtime="1h57m"
        rating="PG"
        imdb-link="https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0087544/">}}


You may want to watch the film first and think about:
  * How do the different groups in the film relate to the natural world.
  * How do the different groups of people feel about nature?
  * Why do they feel that way?

## What the film did well

**The way people relate to the natural world is strongly influenced by their
understanding of it.**

Nausicaa understand the behaviour of the insects and doesn’t fear them. She
can direct them away from conflict with nearby humans. The other people in the
film see the insects as destructive and dangerous and seek to kill them
whenever they encounter them.

The film also shows us how self destructive acting without understanding the
full consequences can be. We are shown how destroying the jungle  would also
be destroying the source of clean water for all the people in the region.

**Emotional awareness and empathy**

Nausicaa is a powerful character who empathizes with the people and insects
and this often leads her to interact with others with more understanding. She
also understands herself and how she feels about her actions. After killing
those who attacked her father she recognizes the anger which caused her to act
the way she did. At the same time she also recognizes the consequences of that
action and chooses to not kill again.  

## What we wanted to see more of

Use of climate change as the cause of the downfall of humans rather than war.
Climate change is the most serious environmental problem we face today. It
would be good to see similar films made today make more explicit use of
climate change to increase awareness of the possible consequences. However it
may be that because climate change is a longer process rather than a single or
comparatively brief event like a war, it is more difficult to approach the
issue in a film.

## Other media mentioned in this episode

**Movies** \- Princess Mononoke (2001) directed by Hayao Miyazaki

**Books** \- The Drowned world (1962) by J. G. Ballard

What did you think? Did we miss something? [Send us your thoughts](/about)!
